# 2DOF-forced-vibrations
Code for computing the forced vibration characteristics of a 2 degree of freedom mechanical system. The 2 DOF system is assumed to be a simple car model with its mass concentrated in a rectangular mass which can translate vertically (bounce) and rotate about its central axis normal to the plane (pitch). The front and rear suspension of the car is modelled using a spring and damper system connected to the rectangle at a particular distance from the centre of mass. There is some form of excitation on the system, in this project, that is either through an external harmonic force (frequency independent) on the car body acting at a particular eccentricity from the centre of mass or base excitations via road bumps (modelled as the wheels travelling over fixed amplitude waves having constant wavelengths). The governing equation of motion for this type of system is a coupled (or non-coupled depending on the system parameters) non-homogeneous (or the pitch equation can be homogeneous if the external excitation force has no eccentricity) ordinary differential equation. 3 approaches have been taken in the code to solve for the system: 

1). Analytical approach where the code is built according to the same exact steps which are taken while analytically solving the equation of motion (generating the characteristic polynomial from the governing equation of motion and then calculating the eigen values and eigen vectors from the polynomial). This approach has the fastest computing time, but is extremely time consuming and complex to code. 

2). Numerical approach where the equation of motion is represented in the state space vector form (`w_dot = A.w + b` where `w_dot` is the first order derivative of the state vector, `w` is the state vector, `A` is the system matrix and `b` is the excitation matrix) and the `ode45` solver in MATLAB is used with the objective function whose independent variables are the time vector and the state vector while the dependent vector is the first derivate of the state vector. This approach is a little slower than the analytical approach but can be used with ease in systems having complex modelling depths. 

3). Symbolic approach where the equations of motion (2nd order non-homogeneous ODE) is solved symbollically. This approach is too slow compared to the other two.

Explanation of the scripts in the repository:
`two_dof_forced_excitation.m` is the script for the case of a frequency independent harmonic excitation force acting on the 2 DOF car model and calculates the bounce and pitch amplitudes and velocities vs time. The script has the option of changing the solver type i.e. is the solution obtained via analytical solver, a numerical solver or a symbolic solver. For the numerical `ode45` solver, a state function (`state_function.m`) is defined which contains the state space representation of the system with external force excitation.

`two_dof_frequency_response.m` is the script which takes a frequency range for the harmonic excitation and develops a frequency response function for the system which would be helpful in computing the eigenmodes of the system. The pitch and bounce motions are seperately plotted against the varying angular frequency.

`position_of_excitation.m` is a script which applies a local optimization technique to find the optimal position of application of excitation force on the system. The aggregate motion of the system is calculated as a seperate 'cost function' (`cost_function.m`) where both the bounce and pitch of the system have a contribution. The position of the external harmonic force is varied starting from an intial point and constrained between a lower bound value and upper bound value. The optimization algorithm finds the local minima of the aggregate motion and outputs the corresponding position of force application. Alternatively, a global optimization algorithm can also be used for more accuracy but at the cost of computing time.

`base_excitation_2dof.m` is a script for the case of the system experiencing base excitations as a result of the wheels traveling on a constant wavelength and frequency wave. For this case, only numerical computation is done as anaytical computation is too complex. `state_function_base_excitation.m` is the state function for this case which is to be used in the `ode45` solver.
